.TH "XPANDLATEX" "1" "" "" ""
.SH NAME
.PP
xpandlatex \- expand LaTeX elements
.SH SYNOPSIS
.PP
\f[C]xpandlatex\f[] [flags] [\-f macro_file] ...
file
.SH OPTIONS
.PP
An [on|off] switch with no argument turns the function on.
.TP
.B \-h, \-\-help
show a help message and exit
.RS
.RE
.TP
.B \-x [on|off], \-\-expand\-macros [on|off]
expand macros (default: on)
.RS
.RE
.TP
.B \-r [on|off], \-\-expand\-refs [on|off]
expand \\refs (default: off)
.RS
.RE
.TP
.B \-b [on|off], \-\-expand\-cites [on|off]
expand bibliography \\cite, \\citep, \\citet ...
(default: off)
.RS
.RE
.TP
.B \-m [on|off], \-\-read\-macros [on|off]
read macro definitions that appear in main file (default: off)
.RS
.RE
.TP
.B \-X [on|off], \-\-expand\-all [on|off]
control all expansion (overrides individual flags)
.RS
.RE
.TP
.B \-I [on|off], \-\-merge\-inputs [on|off]
merge \\input files (default: off)
.RS
.RE
.TP
.B \-T [on|off], \-\-merge\-tocs [on|off]
merge .{toc,lof,lot} (default: off)
.RS
.RE
.TP
.B \-B [on|off], \-\-merge\-bibliography [on|off]
merge compiled bibliography from .bbl (default: off)
.RS
.RE
.TP
.B \-M [on|off], \-\-merge\-all [on|off]
control all merges (overrides individual flags)
.RS
.RE
.TP
.B \-f <file>, \-\-macro\-file <file>
read macros from file
.RS
.RE
.TP
.B \-D #
set debug level
.RS
.RE
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
\f[C]xpandlatex\f[] processes a LaTeX file to do some or all of the
following
.IP \[bu] 2
expand locally or externally defined macros
.IP \[bu] 2
replace \f[C]\\ref\f[]s with corresponding targets
.IP \[bu] 2
replace \f[C]\\cite\f[]* with citation targets
.IP \[bu] 2
include files as directed by: \f[C]\\include{file}\f[],
\f[C]\\tableofcontents\f[], \f[C]\\listoffigures\f[],
\f[C]\\listoftables\f[], \f[C]\\bibliography{}\f[]
.IP \[bu] 2
interpret special commands beginning with '%XP'
.SS Macro handling
.PP
Macros may be defined with \f[C]\\def\f[], \f[C]\\newcommand\f[] or
\f[C]\\renewcommand\f[].
Definitions in the main file are only read with the \f[C]\-m\f[] switch.
Definitions may also be provided from other files using \f[C]\-f\f[].
.PP
See also environments below.
.SS Label/ref handling
.PP
With the \f[C]\-r\f[] switch, label definitions are read from the aux
file, and \f[C]\\ref\f[]s expanded.
References to labels in other files are also expanded correctly by
following any \f[C]\\externaldocument[prefix]{file}\f[] commands (see
\f[C]xr.sty\f[]).
.SS Citation handling
.PP
With the \f[C]\-b\f[] switch \f[C]xpandlatex\f[] replaces
.IP
.nf
\f[C]
\\citetype[opt1][opt2]{key1,key2}
\f[]
.fi
.PP
with
.IP
.nf
\f[C]
[(][opt1\ ]\\XPcitetype{expansion1},\ \\XPcitetype{expansion2}[\ opt2][)]
\f[]
.fi
.PP
where \f[C]\\citetype\f[] may be plain \f[C]\\cite\f[] or natbib
\f[C]\\citep\f[], \f[C]\\citet\f[], \f[C]\\citealt\f[] or
\f[C]\\citeauthor\f[].
The expansion (at least using natbib with apalike.bst) has 4 parts, and
the \f[C]\\XPcitetype\f[] macros should be defined to handle them
correctly.
The following commands work for the natbib/apalike combination:
.IP
.nf
\f[C]
\\newcommand{\\XPcite}[4]{#1}
\\newcommand{\\XPcitep}[4]{#3\ #2}
\\newcommand{\\XPcitet}[4]{#3\ (#2)}
\\newcommand{\\XPcitealt}[4]{#3\ #2}
\\newcommand{\\XPciteauthor}[4]{#3}
\f[]
.fi
.PP
The opening delimeters are chosen appropriately for the citation type,
and cannot currently be altered.
.PP
If only one optional argument appears it is assumed to be a postfix
rather than prefix, as in natbib.
.SS Merging files
.PP
With \f[C]\-I\f[], \f[C]xpandlatex\f[] will merge any external files
referenced by \f[C]\\input{file}\f[].
.PP
With \f[C]\-T\f[], \f[C]xpandlatex\f[] will include \f[C]\&.toc\f[],
\f[C]\&.lof\f[] and \f[C]\&.lot\f[] files in place of the respective
commands \f[C]\\tableofcontents\f[], \f[C]\\listoffigures\f[] and
\f[C]\\listoftables\f[] which cause LaTeX to generate them.
An appropriate \f[C]\\section*{\\namemacro}\f[] line is inserted.
The special macros \f[C]\\XPtocbegin\f[] and \f[C]\\XPtocend\f[], if
defined, will be expanded before and after the
\f[C]\\tableofcontents\f[] inclusion, but after the
\f[C]\\section{}\f[].
Similar macros work for \[aq]lof\[aq] and \[aq]lot\[aq].
.PP
With \f[C]\-B\f[], \f[C]xpandlatex\f[] will include the contents of a
bibtex\-generated \f[C]\&.bbl\f[] file in place of
\f[C]\\bibliography{database.bib}\f[].
It does not read the \f[C]\&.bib\f[] file itself.
No special \f[C]\\begin\f[]/\f[C]\\end\f[] macros are expanded: the
\f[C]{thebibliography}\f[] environment within the \f[C]\&.bbl\f[] file
can be redefined instead.
.SS %XP directives
.PP
The LaTeX file may contain special tokens that begin with '%XP' that are
interpreted by xpandlatex but ignored (along with the rest of the line)
by the LaTeX compiler.
Currently available specials are:
.TP
.B %XP
Ignore the special, but process the rest of the line.
.RS
.RE
.TP
.B %XPCUT ... %XPTUC
Ignore everything (including multiple lines, which may or may not be
commented) between the tokens.
Cannot be nested.
.RS
.RE
.TP
.B %XPVERB ... %XPBREV
Copy everything (comments, %XP specials, warts and all) to the output
without performing any expansions.
Cannot be nested.
.RS
.RE
.PP
Thus, in the code
.IP
.nf
\f[C]
\ %XP\ \\def\\foo{bar}\ %\ latex\ doesn't\ see\ this
\ %XPCUT
\ \\def\\bar{foo}\ %\ xpandlatex\ doesn't\ see\ this
\ %XPTUC
\ %XPVERB%XPCUT\ won\[aq]t\ be\ cut\ %XPTUC%XPBREV
\ 
\f[]
.fi
.PP
the \f[C]\\foo\f[] macro definition will be seen by xpandlatex but not
by LaTeX; the \f[C]\\bar\f[] macro definition will be seen by LaTeX but
not by xpandlatex; and the text
"\f[C]%XPCUT\ won\[aq]t\ be\ cut\ %XPTUC\f[]" will be copied unchanged.
.PP
Note the use of % on the %XP line: if omitted the words would be copied
uncommented to the xpandlatex output.
.PP
Note also that %XP specials that appear in comments will not be
interepreted, and those in macro definitions will not be interpreted
until the macro is expanded.
.PP
See also environment handling specials below.
.SS Environment handling
.PP
xpandlatex reads \f[C]\\newenvironment\f[] and
\f[C]\\renewenvironment\f[] commands, and expands corresponding
\f[C]\\begin{env}...\\end{env}\f[] code.
It can also interpret a special \f[C]\\XPenvironment\f[] command to
execute special actions on the \f[B]body\f[] of a LaTeX environment.
The definition takes the form:
.IP
.nf
\f[C]
\\XPenvironment{name}{begin\ code}{end\ code}{body\ actions}\ 
\f[]
.fi
.PP
The \f[C]{name}\f[], \f[C]{begin\ code}\f[] and \f[C]{end\ code}\f[] are
as for \f[C]\\newenvironment\f[]; except that a special '##' parameter
is replaced by xpandlatex's count of the number of times this
environment has been called.
The final argument may contain the following special symbols:
.TP
.B %XPcopy
Copy out (and interpret) the body as usual
.RS
.RE
.TP
.B %XPdiscard
Discard the body completely
.RS
.RE
.TP
.B %XPwritefile
Write the body to a file called 'name_##.tex', where ## is xpandlatex's
count for the number of times this environment has been encountered.
Note this is \f[B]not\f[] a LaTeX counter, and so will not be affected
by LaTeX commands such as \f[C]\\setcounter\f[].
The body is not copied to the main output.
.RS
.RE
.PP
Multiple body actions may appear: so \f[C]{%XPwritefile\ %XPcopy}\f[]
will copy the body both to the main output and a separate file.
.PP
For example:
.IP
.nf
\f[C]
\\XPenvironment{figure}\ 
{\\begin{center}[Figure\ ##\ about\ here]\\end{center}}\ 
{}\ 
{%XPwritefile}
\f[]
.fi
.PP
writes figure contents to 'figure_1.tex' etc, placing marker text in the
main output stream.
.SH EXAMPLES
.SS Extracting floats
.PP
The file \f[C]paper.tex\f[] contains figures within floats and no
\f[C]\\listoffigures\f[].
We wish to extract each figure to its own file, and add a list of figure
legends to the end of the file, without affecting the LaTeX output from
\f[C]paper.tex\f[] itself.
.PP
As \f[C]paper.tex\f[] has no \f[C]\\listoffigures\f[] command this
operation must be performed in two stages.
We add this code to paper.tex:
.IP
.nf
\f[C]
%%\ near\ the\ beginning\ of\ the\ file:
%XPVERB
%XP\ \\XPenvironment{figure}{\\begin{center}[Figure\ ##\ about\ here]\\end{center}}{}{%XPwritefile}
%XPBREV

%%\ near\ the\ end\ of\ the\ file:
%%\ Double\-wrap\ listoffigures\ for\ xpandlatex.\ \ 
%XPVERB\\def\\listfigurename{Figure\ Legends}%XPBREV
%XPVERB\\listoffigures%XPBREV
\f[]
.fi
.PP
Then run: (a Makefile may be useful)
.IP
.nf
\f[C]
xpandlatex\ \-X\ off\ \-M\ off\ paper.tex\ >\ paper\-int.tex
[pdf]latex\ paper\-int.tex
xpandlatex\ \-m\ \-T\ on\ paper\-lof.tex\ >\ paper\-fin.tex
\f[]
.fi
.PP
The first \f[C]xpandlatex\f[] call does nothing except strip the
\f[C]%%XPVERB\f[] environments, exposing the \f[C]%XP\f[] line and the
\f[C]\\listoffigures\f[] commands.
The LaTeX compile creates the \f[C]\&.lof\f[] file.
The final \f[C]xpandlatex\f[] call includes this into the output.
It also processes the define protected by \f[C]%XP\f[] (note the
\f[C]\-m\f[] flag) and splits the figures into individual files.
This environment definition could also be placed in a helper
\[aq]macro\[aq] file and included with the \f[C]\-f\f[] flag instead.
.PP
To compile the figures create a wrapper file \f[C]fig_wrapper.tex\f[]:
.IP
.nf
\f[C]
\\documentclass{article}\ 

%%\ include\ packages\ needed\ for\ graphics
\\usepackage{graphicx,tikz}\ 

%%\ remove\ figure\ captions
\\usepackage{caption}
\\DeclareCaptionFormat{blank}{}
\\captionsetup[figure]{format=blank}

%%\ no\ page\ numbers
\\pagestyle{empty}

\\begin{document}
\\begin{figure}
\ \ \\input{\\jobname}
\\end{figure}
\\end{document}
\f[]
.fi
.PP
and use the following Makefile rule to compile:
.IP
.nf
\f[C]
figures:\ figure_*.pdf\ 

figure_*.pdf:\ %.pdf:\ %.tex\ figure_wrapper.tex
\ \ \ \ pdflatex\ \-jobname\ $*\ figure_wrapper.tex
\f[]
.fi
.PP
If the final xpanded LaTeX file is to be processed by \f[C]pandoc(1)\f[]
then it may be useful to add the following code to \f[C]paper.tex\f[]
(or, unprotected, to the macro file) as well as \f[C]pandoc\f[] seems
not to understand TOC commands:
.IP
.nf
\f[C]
%XPVERB
%XP\ \\newcommand{\\XPlofbegin}{\\begin{description}}
%XP\ \\newcommand{\\contentsline}[3]{#2\\par}
%XP\ \\newcommand{\\numberline}[1]{\\item[Figure\ #1]}
%XP\ \\newcommand{\\XPlofend}{\\end{description}}
%XPBREV
\f[]
.fi
.SH BUGS
.PP
It does what I need, but has not been tested widely
.SH AUTHOR
.PP
Maneesh Sahani (xpandlatex \@github)
